A SK O NLY W HEN N EEDED : P ROACTIVE R ETRIEVAL FROM
M EMORY AND S KILLS FOR E XPERIENCE -D RIVEN L IFELONG
AGENTS

arXiv:2604.20572v1 [cs.CL] 22 Apr 2026

1

Yuxuan Cai1 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Qin Chen1 , Liang He1
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{jzhou, qchen, lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

A BSTRACT
Online lifelong learning enables agents to accumulate experience across interactions and continually improve on long-horizon tasks. However, existing methods typically treat retrieval from past
experience as a passive operation, triggering it only at task initialization or after completing a step.
Consequently, agents often fail to identify knowledge gaps during interaction and proactively retrieve
the most useful experience for the current decision. To address this limitation, we present P ROAC TAGENT , an experience-driven lifelong learning framework for proactive retrieval over a structured
experience base. We first introduce Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution (E XP O N E VO), which
enables continual improvement through both policy updates and memory refinement. The experience
base organizes historical interactions into typed repositories, including factual memory, episodic memory, and behavioral skills, so that retrieval can provide both relevant evidence and actionable guidance.
On top of this, we propose Proactive Reinforcement Learning-based Retrieval (P ROACT RL), which
models retrieval as an explicit policy action and learns when and what to retrieve via paired-branch
process rewards. By comparing continuations from identical interaction prefixes with and without
retrieval, P ROACT RL provides step-level supervision for retrieval decisions, encouraging retrieval
only when it leads to better task outcomes or higher efficiency. Experiments on SciWorld, AlfWorld,
and StuLife show that P ROACTAGENT consistently improves lifelong agent performance, achieving
success rates of 73.50% on SciWorld and 71.28% on AlfWorld while substantially reducing retrieval
overhead, and attains performance competitive with proprietary models on StuLife.

1

Introduction

Language agents are progressing beyond isolated task-solving toward online lifelong learning, a paradigm in which an
agent engages with a continuous stream of interactive tasks while accumulating experience across episodes. Embodied
simulation [1, 2], open-world exploration [3], and continual learning scenarios [4] exemplify this paradigm, requiring
agents to operate in evolving environments. Recent advances in chain-of-thought reasoning [5, 6], tool use [7, 8],
and self-reflection [9, 10] have dramatically expanded what an agent can accomplish within a single episode, yet
these capabilities yield diminishing returns once the primary bottleneck shifts from within-episode problem-solving to
cross-episode online knowledge utilization. Recent benchmarks confirm that even state-of-the-art proprietary models
struggle with long-horizon lifelong tasks [4], suggesting that raw model capacity alone cannot substitute for the ability
to learn from and build upon interaction history. A truly lifelong agent must learn, much as humans do, to transform
historical lessons and acquired skills into effective guidance for novel situations.
To realize online experience utilization, a natural and widely adopted approach is to equip agents with an external
experience base that stores knowledge accumulated from past interactions [11, 3, 10, 12, 4]. By querying this
repository at decision time, agents can in principle recall relevant facts, reuse successful strategies, and avoid repeating
known mistakes. As illustrated in Figure 1, existing methods mainly differ in how retrieval is triggered. Static
initialization [11, 13, 3, 12] injects memory once at episode onset, allowing agents to start with relevant context but
leaving them unable to seek new information when task dynamics shift. Continuous retrieval [14, 12, 15] performs

ICALK@ECNU

Figure 1: Comparison of retrieval strategies for online lifelong agents. Static initialization provides memory once at task
start, failing when task dynamics shift. Continuous retrieval queries at every step, causing context overload. LLM-gated
retrieval adds a separate model to judge necessity, incurring latency and cost. Proactive retrieval (ours) learns when to
retrieve through paired-branch process rewards, achieving adaptive control without additional model calls.
retrieval at every step, increasing access to external experience but often introducing substantial redundancy and context
overload. LLM-gated retrieval [16, 17] further employs an additional model or heuristic to decide whether retrieval is
needed, improving flexibility at the cost of extra latency and inference overhead. These studies demonstrate the promise
of memory-augmented lifelong agents, but also reveal that effective experience utilization depends critically on how
retrieval is controlled and how accumulated experience is updated over time.
However, existing lifelong agents still face two fundamental limitations. First, current retrieval mechanisms remain
essentially passive: retrieval is triggered by pre-defined positions, externally designed rules, or separate gating modules,
rather than being learned as an intrinsic capability of the agent itself. As a result, agents struggle to recognize knowledge
gaps during interaction and proactively retrieve the most useful past experience for the current decision. Second,
existing online update strategies typically focus on either textual memory accumulation or parameter optimization,
while treating the two as largely independent processes. In practice, both are indispensable for lifelong adaptation.
Textual memory preserves and expands externalized experience, including facts, episodes, and reusable skills, whereas
parameter updates improve the agent’s internal policy for future decision making. Updating only one side, or evolving
them in isolation, limits the agent’s ability to continually improve from interaction history. Therefore, an effective
lifelong agent must address both challenges simultaneously: it should learn to retrieve experience proactively, while
also jointly evolving its memory and policy online.
To address these challenges, we propose P ROACTAGENT, an experience-driven lifelong learning framework that
unifies proactive retrieval with experience-enhanced online evolution over a structured experience base. Specifically,
P ROACTAGENT consists of two tightly coupled components. The first component, Experience-Enhanced Online
Evolution (E XP O N E VO), jointly improves the agent through memory refinement and policy optimization, enabling
it to update both what experience it stores and how it acts during online interaction. The experience base organizes
historical interactions into typed repositories, including factual memory, episodic memory, and behavioral skills, so that
retrieval can provide both relevant evidence and actionable guidance. The second component, Proactive Reinforcement
Learning-based Retrieval (P ROACT RL), formulates retrieval as an explicit policy action and learns both when and
what to retrieve through paired-branch process rewards. By comparing continuations from identical interaction prefixes
with and without retrieval, P ROACT RL provides step-level supervision for retrieval decisions and encourages retrieval
only when it leads to better task outcomes or higher efficiency. Together, these two components directly address the two
central limitations of existing lifelong agents: passive experience invocation and decoupled online updating.
We evaluate P ROACTAGENT on SciWorld, AlfWorld, and StuLife, achieving success rates of 73.50% on SciWorld
and 71.28% on AlfWorld while substantially reducing retrieval overhead, and attains performance competitive with
proprietary models on StuLife. These results demonstrate that proactive retrieval, when coupled with joint memory and
policy evolution, substantially improves both the effectiveness and efficiency of online lifelong agents.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
2

ICALK@ECNU

• We propose P ROACTAGENT, a proactive online lifelong learning framework that enables agents to continually evolve
from interaction history rather than relying on passively invoked experience.
• We design two key components within P ROACTAGENT: Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution (E XP O N E VO),
which jointly improves textual memory and policy parameters during online interaction, and Proactive Reinforcement
Learning-based Retrieval (P ROACT RL), which learns when and what to retrieve through paired-branch process
rewards.
• We conduct extensive experiments on SciWorld, AlfWorld, and StuLife, showing that P ROACTAGENT consistently
improves lifelong agent performance and retrieval efficiency, and attains performance competitive with proprietary
models.

2

Related Work

Memory-augmented lifelong agents. External memory for neural models has progressed from differentiable controllers [18, 19, 20] through retrieval-augmented generation [21, 22] to memory systems designed for interactive agents,
where memory must accumulate operational experience across episodes rather than index a static corpus. Recent agent
memory systems manage persistent interactions through summarization or hierarchical architectures [11, 13, 23, 24]
and maintain evolving stores that grow alongside continued interaction [14]. As these repositories scale, how retrieval
is triggered becomes increasingly critical. Existing approaches differ primarily in triggering mechanism: static initialization [11, 13] injects memory once at episode onset, providing startup context but leaving agents unable to adapt
when conditions shift mid-episode; continuous retrieval [14, 15] queries at every step, increasing access at the cost of
redundancy and context overload; and LLM-gated approaches [16, 17] employ a separate model to judge necessity,
improving flexibility but introducing extra latency. Moreover, most systems store experience in a single undifferentiated
repository [11, 13], conflating factual evidence with behavioral guidance. More critically, retrieval across all three
paradigms remains governed by fixed schedules, external rules, or separate modules rather than learned as an intrinsic
agent capability, leaving agents unable to recognize when current knowledge is insufficient and proactively seek the
most relevant experience.
Retrieval control for LLMs. A growing body of work studies how LLMs can control when and what to retrieve. In
question answering, FLARE [25] triggers retrieval based on generation confidence, Self-RAG [26] generates reflection
tokens to assess retrieval necessity, and Adaptive-RAG [27] routes queries by estimated complexity. In the agent setting,
Toolformer and ReAct [7, 8] train models to interleave tool calls with reasoning, while IRCoT [28] further interleaves
retrieval with chain-of-thought steps. These methods advance retrieval precision but share two limitations in the lifelong
agent context. First, they operate over static or slowly changing knowledge bases [27, 25], whereas a lifelong agent must
selectively access a repository that grows continuously through its own interaction history. Second, and more critically,
retrieval decisions in all these systems remain passive, governed by confidence thresholds, supervised classifiers, or
generation-time heuristics that receive no outcome-level feedback on whether a particular retrieval action improved the
downstream result [28]. When retrieval introduces noise or displaces useful context, these methods cannot attribute
the failure to a specific retrieval decision, because supervision does not isolate individual retrieval actions from the
surrounding generation process.
Online evolution of interactive agents. A parallel line of research enables agents to improve autonomously through
interaction. Within-episode methods such as iterative self-critique [9] strengthen single-episode capabilities but do not
accumulate cross-episode experience. Cross-episode approaches pursue continual improvement through two largely
independent channels. Memory-centric methods accumulate textual experience: Reflexion [10] stores verbal reflections
from past failures, Voyager [3] builds reusable skill libraries, and ExpeL [12] distills lessons from trial outcomes.
Parameter-centric methods optimize the behavioral policy through online reinforcement learning [29, 30]. Recent
lifelong benchmarks [4] further confirm that raw model capacity cannot substitute for sustained online knowledge
accumulation. Despite the value of both memory and policy evolution, existing systems treat them in isolation: memory
repositories grow without policy-level guidance on retrieval quality, and policy updates proceed without structured
access to accumulated experience.

3

Method

We propose P ROACTAGENT, an experience-driven lifelong learning framework that enables agents to continually
evolve from interaction history through joint experience refinement, policy optimization, and proactive retrieval over
a structured experience base. P ROACTAGENT addresses two key challenges in online lifelong learning: the lack
of proactive experience utilization during interaction, and the decoupled treatment of textual memory updates and
3

ICALK@ECNU

Figure 2: Overview of P ROACTAGENT. (a) Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution (E XP O N E VO) closes the loop
between acting, experience accumulation, and policy optimization. (b) E XPERIENCE BASE partitions experience into
five typed stores (Mf , Me , S + , S − , S ∆ ), so a single query returns complementary evidence and behavioral guidance.
(c) Proactive Reinforcement Learning-based Retrieval (P ROACT RL) replays the shared prefix to produce a retrieval
branch τ ret and a matched no-retrieval branch τ no-ret ; the outcome gap yields a process reward that is positive only
when retrieval strictly improves the trajectory, providing step-level supervision for when and what to retrieve.
parameter updates in existing methods. To this end, P ROACTAGENT consists of two tightly coupled components.
First, Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution (E XP O N E VO) maintains a closed loop between acting, experience
accumulation, and policy improvement, allowing the agent to update both its externalized memory and internal decision
policy over time. Second, Proactive Reinforcement Learning-based Retrieval (P ROACT RL) formulates retrieval as
an explicit policy action and learns both when and what to retrieve through step-level supervision from paired-branch
process rewards. Together, these components enable the agent to proactively identify knowledge gaps, retrieve the most
useful past experience, and continuously improve its behavior in a self-reinforcing online evolution process.
3.1

Formal Definition

We formulate each interactive task instance as a goal-conditioned partially observable Markov decision process.
Specifically, a task instance is defined as
x = ⟨E, o0 , g⟩,

E = (S, A, G, P, R, Ω, O, γ),

(1)

where S, A, and G denote the state, action, and goal spaces, respectively; P (s′ | s, a) represents the transition function;
R(s, a, g) represents the goal-conditioned reward; Ω denotes the observation space; O(o | s′ , a) denotes the observation
model; and γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor. Given a horizon T , at step t, the agent receives a partial observation ot ∈ Ω
and constructs the interaction history
ht = (x, o1 , a1 , . . . , ot ),
(2)
where at is the action generated by the model at step t. We augment the action space to A = Aenv ∪ Aret , so the
policy can output either an environment action at ∈ Aenv or a retrieval action at = R ETRIEVE(qt ), where qt denotes a
natural-language query. If the agent triggers a retrieval action, the returned experience Dt is appended to the context
T
before the subsequent decision; otherwise, Dt = ∅. A trajectory is the ordered sequence τ = (ht , at , Dt , rtenv ) t=1 .
As the agent processes successive tasks, its experience base D grows continuously while the behavioral policy adapts
through interaction. The central challenge is learning to proactively identify knowledge gaps and selectively retrieve
from this expanding repository, since outcome-level rewards alone cannot provide step-level supervision for individual
retrieval decisions. P ROACTAGENT addresses this through two tightly coupled mechanisms (Figure 2). Section 3.2
presents Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution, which organizes experience into a structured base and interleaves
experience accumulation with policy optimization in a closed loop. Section 3.3 introduces P ROACT RL, which provides
step-level supervision for retrieval decisions through adaptive rollout with paired-branch process rewards, enabling the
agent to learn precisely when and what to retrieve. Implementation details are provided in the appendix.
4

ICALK@ECNU

3.2

Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution

In the online lifelong learning paradigm, an agent engages with a continuous stream of interactive tasks while two
resources evolve through successive episodes: the accumulated experience base and the behavioral policy. These
resources are naturally complementary. The experience base supplies factual knowledge, episodic precedents, and
distilled behavioral patterns from which the policy can learn; a stronger policy, in turn, generates higher-quality
trajectories that yield richer entries for the experience base. P ROACTAGENT closes this loop by unifying experience
accumulation and policy optimization into a single iterative cycle (Figure 2 (a)): given a stream of tasks, the agent
(1) interacts with the environment under the current policy πθ , augmented by proactive retrieval from a structured
experience base D; (2) distills completed trajectories into typed experience entries that are incorporated into D; and
(3) updates πθ via reinforcement learning on the collected trajectories, where retrieval decisions are optimized jointly
with task actions through paired-branch process rewards (Section 3.3). This creates a self-reinforcing loop: a richer
experience base provides more relevant retrieval results, which improves trajectory quality, which in turn yields
higher-quality experience entries and stronger policy gradients.
A critical design choice within this framework is how accumulated experience is organized for effective retrieval. At
decision time, an interactive agent benefits from two distinct types of support: relevant memory (factual knowledge or
similar prior episodes) and behavioral guidance (which action patterns succeed or fail in analogous states). Conflating
all experience into a single undifferentiated pool mixes these two modes of support, producing redundant or competing
retrieval results. To address this, the experience base maintains a structured repository (Figure 2 (b)):
D = M ∪ S,
f

S = S + ∪ S − ∪ S ∆,

M = Mf ∪ Me ,

e

+

−

(3)

∆

where M and M denote factual and episodic memories, and S , S , S denote distilled behavioral skills from
successes, failures, and comparative evaluations. Each entry r ∈ D stores textual content, a type label, an embedding
vector e(r), and a priority score p(r). Given a query qt , the experience base returns a type-balanced experience:
[
X
Dt =
TopK(qt , C, kC ),
C = {Mf , Me , S + , S − , S ∆ },
kC = K,
(4)
C∈C

C∈C

where entries within each subset are ranked by:
score(qt , r) = sim(e(qt ), e(r)) + λp p(r).

(5)

The similarity term ensures relevance to the current query, while the priority term softly favors entries with demonstrated
utility. This typed decomposition enables a single query to return complementary evidence (what is true, what happened
before) and guidance (what to do, what to avoid), mitigating the redundancy inherent in monolithic memory systems.
After each episode, the evolution framework distills completed trajectories into new entries that grow the structured base.
Factual and episodic entries capture environment states and interaction patterns from individual trajectories. Success
and failure skills abstract reusable strategies and error patterns from outcome-specific trajectory subsets. Comparative
skills, which encode why one continuation outperforms another, are distilled from the paired rollout branches produced
by P ROACT RL (Section 3.3), exploiting shared prefixes to provide the most localized contrastive signal. Priority scores
are updated only for entries that were actually retrieved and associated with improved outcomes, creating a lightweight
mechanism that progressively surfaces high-value experience.
Within the online evolution framework, retrieval is not a passive heuristic but an explicit policy action optimized jointly
with task behavior. As the experience base grows through continued interaction, selective retrieval becomes increasingly
critical: indiscriminate querying floods context with irrelevant information, while missed opportunities leave the agent
repeating past errors. However, standard outcome-level rewards cannot provide the step-level supervision needed to
learn which retrieval decisions are beneficial. The next section introduces P ROACT RL, which addresses this through
paired-branch process rewards.
3.3

Proactive Reinforcement Learning-based Retrieval

Within the online evolution framework, the agent must learn when retrieval actively improves outcomes versus when
current knowledge suffices. Let zt = 1[at = R ETRIEVE(qt )] denote whether a retrieval action is executed at step t. The
core difficulty is that outcome-level rewards signal task success or failure but cannot isolate whether a specific retrieval
decision at a particular step was necessary or beneficial. When an episode fails, the agent cannot determine whether
retrieval was unnecessary, mistimed, or too vague. To learn proactive retrieval control, we require step-level supervision
that directly answers: did this retrieval actively improve the trajectory, or would the agent have succeeded without it?
To address this challenge, we introduce an adaptive rollout mechanism that generates comparative evidence (Figure 2
(c)). Whenever an initial rollout triggers a retrieval action at step tb , we adaptively sample alternative continuations
5

ICALK@ECNU

from the same interaction prefix htb :
ret
τ ret = τ<tb ⊕ τ≥t
,
b

no-ret
τ no-ret = Replay(τ<tb ) ⊕ τ≥t
.
b

(6)

Here τ<tb and τ≥tb denote the ordered prefix and suffix subsequences of τ , respectively, and ⊕ denotes sequence
concatenation. The rollout τ ret preserves the retrieval decision and its subsequent context, whereas τ no-ret explores
alternative actions from the same prefix by temporarily suppressing the retrieval action at tb . Because both rollouts
share the same history before the branching point, the divergence between them provides a precise comparative signal:
if τ ret outperforms τ no-ret , the retrieval was proactive and necessary; if not, the retrieval was passive or redundant.
This paired-branch comparison directly isolates the utility of the specific retrieval decision, enabling step-level process
rewards for proactive control.
For a branched trajectory pair indexed by i, let j(i) denote the matched no-retrieval counterpart of rollout i, and let
(i)
zi ≡ ztb ∈ {0, 1} denote the retrieval indicator at the branching step. P ROACT RL defines the trajectory-level reward
for reinforcement learning as follows:
Ritraj = Rienv + riproc + rieff ,
(7)
PTi env
env
where Ri = t=1 rt denotes the cumulative environment reward of trajectory i. For a trajectory i that includes a
retrieval action, we evaluate its advantage over the adaptively sampled non-retrieval counterpart j(i) by computing the
rollout margin:


Tj(i) − Ti
env
∆i = Rienv − Rj(i)
+ λT
,
(8)
max(Tj(i) , 1)
where Ti denotes the number of interaction steps. The retrieval process reward is then defined as

zi > 0 and ∆i > 0,
α,
riproc = −α, zi > 0 and ∆i < 0,
(9)

0,
otherwise.
This process reward directly enables proactive retrieval control. It penalizes passive or vague queries (∆i < 0) where
retrieval provides no benefit over proceeding without it, thereby teaching the agent when not to retrieve and what
to avoid querying. Conversely, it provides explicit positive reinforcement (α) only when the specific query content
actively unlocks a superior or more efficient continuation, teaching the agent exactly when a query is necessary and
what information is most effective to retrieve. By learning from these paired comparisons, the agent develops genuine
proactivity, i.e., the ability to recognize when current knowledge suffices versus when retrieval is needed.
To further penalize wasteful retrieval actions, we introduce the following efficiency penalty term:


T̄g(i) − Ti
eff
ri = −wq 1[repeati ] + clip wt
, −|wt |, |wt | ,
max(T̄g(i) , 1)

(10)

where repeati equals 1 if rollout i repeats a query string that already appeared earlier in the same trajectory and
0 otherwise, g(i) denotes the goal associated with rollout i, and T̄g(i) is the empirical average length of successful
trajectories for goal g(i). This term discourages repeating identical queries and provides rewards for shorter, successful
trajectories. The formal proof showing that this process reward provides direct supervision for proactive retrieval is
provided in the appendix. Given a task instance x, we sample a group of G rollouts {τ (1) , . . . , τ (G) } and compute the
standard normalized advantage for GRPO as follows:
Ai =

Ritraj − mean({Rjtraj }G
j=1 )
std({Rjtraj }G
j=1 ) + ϵ

.

The optimization of the policy is performed using the standard GRPO objective:
"
#
G
1 X
JP ROACT RL (θ) = Ex,{τ (i) }
min (ρi Ai , clip(ρi , 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ai ) − βDKL (πθ ∥πref ) ,
G i=1

(11)

(12)

(i)

where ρi = πθπθ (τ(τ (i)|x)
denotes the importance sampling ratio.
|x)
old

Together, the E XP O N E VO and P ROACT RL form a self-reinforcing cycle: as training progresses, improved trajectories
yield higher-quality experience entries, and richer experience enables more precise retrieval control through increasingly
informative paired-branch comparisons. This mutual reinforcement between experience accumulation and policy
optimization distinguishes P ROACTAGENTfrom approaches that evolve either resource in isolation, empowering it to
proactively identify gaps in current knowledge and initiate searches on its own, thereby achieving higher task success
rates and greater efficiency.
6

ICALK@ECNU

4

Experiments

Our experiments are designed to answer three research questions:
• RQ 1: Does learned proactive retrieval outperform passive retrieval baselines? (§4.2, §4.4)
• RQ 2: Does joint co-evolution of experience and policy outperform approaches that evolve either resource in isolation,
and what is the contribution of each component? (§4.2, §4.3)
• RQ 3: Does proactive retrieval yield efficiency gains alongside accuracy improvements, and does the benefit
generalize across model scales? (§4.4)
4.1

Experimental setup

Datasets. We evaluate P ROACTAGENT on three interactive benchmarks: SciWorld [2], AlfWorld [1], and StuLife [4].
SciWorld and AlfWorld report the success rate (SR) and the average number of interaction rounds, whereas StuLife
reports the SR and StuGPA. For SciWorld and AlfWorld, we adopt the training splits of AgentGym-RL [31] and
evaluate on the test set of AgentGym-RL (SciWorld) and the official test set (AlfWorld). Because StuLife provides no
training set, evaluation on this benchmark is restricted to methods capable of evolving entirely online. For methods that
involve reinforcement learning, a cold-start phase on the training set precedes policy optimization; methods without a
training set (StuLife) rely solely on online evolution.
Baselines. Unless noted otherwise, all primary experiments utilize Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct as the base model; a scaling
experiment with Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct is also reported. We compare against offline baselines that maintain static
parameters after deployment (ReAct [8], SFT, and GRPO [32]) as well as online baselines that evolve over the
test stream (GRPO with online parameter evolution, AWM, Reflexion [10], MemoryBank [13], Mem0 [24], and
GRPO+Reflexion).
Evaluation protocol. Methods trained solely on fixed datasets (SFT and GRPO) are offline: both the weights and the
knowledge remain static after deployment. All remaining methods are online, evolving over the test stream through
memory evolution (the D grows with incoming trajectories), online parameter evolution (single-instance reinforcement
learning updates the policy), or the co-evolution of both. P ROACTAGENT performs online co-evolution in which
experience accumulation and the adaptation of parameters are tightly interleaved at single-instance granularity.
4.2

Main Results

Table 1 presents the main results across three benchmarks. We organize the key findings around the three research
questions.
Learned proactive retrieval outperforms passive strategies. Among online baselines that maintain experience, AWM,
MemoryBank, and Mem0 retrieve from accumulated experience without learned retrieval control, failing to achieve
significant improvements over the base model. Reflexion adds episodic reflections but similarly lacks learned control
over retrieval timing and content, even when combined with reinforcement learning (GRPO+Reflexion: 55.50%),
passive retrieval leaves substantial room for improvement. P ROACTAGENT closes this gap by learning retrieval as an
explicit policy action through paired-branch process rewards, achieving an 18.0-point gain over GRPO+Reflexion on
SciWorld with consistent improvements across all three benchmarks.
Joint evolution of experience and policy outperforms isolated approaches. Evolving parameters in isolation proves
insufficient. GRPO (online) underperforms offline GRPO on SciWorld (46.50% vs. 52.00%) and yields only marginal
gains on AlfWorld (68.71% vs. 67.69%), confirming that online updates without structured experience overfit to
noisy trajectories. Conversely, memory-only online baselines (AWM, Reflexion, MemoryBank, Mem0) accumulate
experience without policy adaptation, achieving at most 7.34% SR on StuLife. By unifying experience refinement with
policy optimization, P ROACTAGENT surpassing the strongest combined baseline (GRPO+Reflexion) and approaching
proprietary model performance on StuLife [4].
Proactive control yields efficiency gains alongside accuracy. P ROACTAGENT reduces interaction rounds by 33.2%
on SciWorld (27.52 → 18.38) and 22.5% on AlfWorld (16.42 → 12.73) relative to GRPO+Reflexion. By learning when
current knowledge suffices and when retrieval is needed, proactive control avoids both unnecessary queries that flood
the context and missed retrieval opportunities that force the agent to rediscover known solutions.
7

ICALK@ECNU

Table 1: Main results across three lifelong agent benchmarks. The best result are highlighted in bold.

SciWorld

AlfWorld

StuLife

Method

SR ↑

Rounds ↓

SR ↑

Rounds ↓

SR ↑

StuGPA ↑

Offline baselines
Baseline
SFT
GRPO

2.00
19.50
52.00

33.40
30.26
26.51

27.69
54.36
67.69

32.85
26.78
17.84

2.56
5.11
–

6.33
7.27
–

Online baselines
GRPO (online)
AWM
Reflexion
MemoryBank
Mem0
GRPO+Reflexion

46.50
1.00
4.00
2.50
3.00
55.50

27.87
35.65
33.73
30.24
34.94
27.52

68.71
31.28
36.92
32.31
33.85
67.18

13.99
33.56
38.57
37.14
32.11
16.42

6.71
3.51
6.82
6.05
7.34
9.37

10.28
7.60
11.31
7.69
10.83
13.51

Ours
P ROACTAGENT

73.50

18.38

71.28

12.73

12.35

19.26

Table 2: Ablation study on SciWorld. Progressive ablation (top) cumulatively removes components from the full
P ROACTAGENT. Component ablation (bottom) isolates individual design choices from the variant without online
parameter evolution. All variants retain online D evolution.
Variant

SR ↑

Rounds ↓

Progressive ablation
P ROACTAGENT
w/o E XP O N E VO
w/o P ROACT RL
w/o E XP O N E VO + P ROACT RL

73.50
71.50
26.50
5.50

18.38
17.15
27.80
30.18

Component ablation (from w/o online param. evol.)
Replace D with Reflexion
62.50
23.15
Remove paired-branch reward
65.00
27.31
Remove cold-start stage
59.50
29.04

4.3

Ablation Study

Progressive ablation. We cumulatively remove components from the full P ROACTAGENT to measure their layered
contribution. Removing E XP O N E VOresults in the offline variant (71.50%), with a 2.0-point gap, indicating that online
parameter evolution is essential to unlock further performance improvements. Further removing P ROACT RL, leaving
only SFT training without RL-based retrieval learning, causes the largest single drop of 45.0 points (26.50%), confirming
that learned proactive retrieval is the most impactful component. Finally, removing E XP O N E VO and P ROACT RL
leaves only the raw E XPERIENCE BASE without any policy training or proactive retrieval (5.50%), demonstrating that
structured experience alone is insufficient without online evolution.
Component ablation. Starting from the variant without online parameter evolution (71.50%), we isolate individual
design choices. Replacing the structured D with Reflexion reduces SR by 9.0 points (62.50%), confirming that typed
decomposition outperforms monolithic memory. Removing paired-branch process rewards while retaining standard
GRPO training yields a 6.5-point decrease (65.00%), demonstrating that step-level counterfactual supervision improves
retrieval learning beyond what outcome-level rewards alone provide. Removing the cold-start phase causes the largest
single-component drop of 12.0 points (59.50%), confirming that proactive retrieval tool-calling requires supervised
initialization before reinforcement learning can effectively shape retrieval decisions.
8

ICALK@ECNU

Table 3: Memory vs. skill ablation within the E XPERIENCE BASE. Removing either component degrades performance,
confirming complementary roles.
Variant
Full E XPERIENCE BASE
Skill only
Memory only

SciWorld SR ↑

AlfWorld SR ↑

StuLife SR ↑

71.50
69.00
67.50

71.28
67.69
66.15

12.35
10.74
11.68

Figure 3: Inference efficiency and training dynamics on SciWorld. Left: P ROACTAGENT achieves higher success
rates with fewer interaction rounds and lower token consumption than all baselines, where bubble area indicates average
prompt tokens per episode. Right: P ROACTAGENT consistently outperforms GRPO throughout training, converging to
a substantially higher final accuracy.
Experience ablation. As shown in table 3, ablating either degrades performance across all benchmarks, confirming
complementary roles. Skill-only performs slightly better on SciWorld and AlfWorld, suggesting action abstractions
contribute more in task-oriented environments. Memory-only shows relative strength on StuLife, where long-horizon
tasks with cross-task dependencies depend more on factual persistence.
4.4

Additional Analysis

Efficiency analysis. The left panel of Figure 3 shows that performance gains stem from proactive control rather than
extended contexts. P ROACTAGENT achieves the highest success rate with the fewest interaction rounds and lowest token
consumption among all methods, which achieves 73.50% SR with only 0.43k tokens per task, whereas GRPO+Reflexion
consumes 0.95k tokens for 55.50% SR. The right panel shows training dynamics: P ROACT RL maintains a consistent
advantage over vanilla GRPO from mid-training onward. These result confirms that proactive retrieval outperforms
passive retrieval.
Model scaling. Table 4 shows that proactive retrieval remains effective at smaller scales. The 3B model achieves
53.50% SR (+24.0 points over 3B GRPO+Reflexion), nearly matching 7B GRPO+Reflexion (55.00%) while requiring
48% fewer interaction rounds (14.35 vs. 27.52). These results suggest that proactive retrieval can partially offset
capacity gaps through more selective decision-making.
Benchmark-specific behavior. Different benchmarks reveal distinct aspects of proactive retrieval. SciWorld shows
the largest gains in both SR and efficiency, suggesting that retrieval timing is the dominant bottleneck in longhorizon scientific tasks. AlfWorld exhibits smaller SR gains but substantial efficiency improvements, indicating
that proactive retrieval primarily eliminates wasted exploration. StuLife shows the strongest response to online
adaptation: P ROACTAGENT achieves performance comparable to leading proprietary systems [4], demonstrating that
proactive retrieval can bridge the capability gap between open-weight and closed-source models in tasks with long-term
dependencies.
Case study. Figure 4 contrasts query and no-query branches across all three benchmarks. In SciWorld, a single factual
retrieval (aluminum foil is inherently conductive) bypasses an entire invalid wiring procedure that traps the no-query
branch. In ALFWorld, retrieving a procedural completion rule eliminates redundant room scanning and wrong-object
selection, finishing the task in three steps. In StuLife, retrieving course misconduct criteria provides knowledge absent
9

ICALK@ECNU

Table 4: Model scaling on SciWorld with Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct. Our 3B model nearly matches 7B GRPO+Reflexion in
SR while using 48% fewer rounds.
Method

SR ↑

Rounds ↓

GRPO (3B)
GRPO+Reflexion (3B)
GRPO+Reflexion (7B)
P ROACTAGENT (3B)

24.00
29.50
55.00
53.50

24.14
20.09
27.52
14.35

Figure 4: Case studies across SciWorld, ALFWorld, and StuLife. Each panel contrasts a query branch (green)
against a matched no-query branch (red) from the same interaction prefix or task instance. In all three cases, a single
targeted retrieval at the action-critical decision point leads to immediate success, while the no-query branch drifts into
invalid actions, wrong-object selection, or stalled interaction and fails.
from the model’s parametric memory, enabling a correct answer on the first attempt. Across all cases, one targeted
query at the decision-critical step replaces a longer, failure-prone trajectory, confirming that learned proactive retrieval
is the key enabler of reliable long-horizon behavior.

5

Conclusion

We introduced P ROACTAGENT, an experience-driven lifelong learning framework that enables online lifelong agents
to proactively retrieve from a structured experience base and continually improve through interaction. E XP O N E VO
jointly refines a structured experience base that organizes historical interactions into typed repositories, including
factual memory, episodic memory, and behavioral skills, alongside policy updates within a unified co-evolution loop.
P ROACT RL formulates retrieval as an explicit policy action and learns both when and what to retrieve through pairedbranch process rewards, which provide step-level supervision by comparing continuations with and without retrieval
from identical interaction prefixes. Experiments on SciWorld, AlfWorld, and StuLife demonstrate that P ROACTAGENT
consistently improves both task success rates and interaction efficiency, with a 3B-parameter model equipped with
proactive retrieval rivaling 7B passively augmented baselines. These results suggest that learning to proactively control
retrieval is more critical than scaling model capacity alone for long-horizon lifelong tasks, and that such control
constitutes a fundamental capability for autonomous agents operating in complex, evolving environments.

References
[1] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht.
ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In International Conference on
10

ICALK@ECNU

Learning Representations, 2021.
[2] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Cote, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. ScienceWorld: Is your agent
smarter than a 5th grader? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 2022.
[3] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima
Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[4] Yuxuan Cai, Yipeng Hao, Jie Zhou, Hang Yan, Zhikai Lei, Rui Zhen, Zhenhua Han, Yutao Yang, Junsong
Li, Qianjun Pan, Tianyu Huai, Qin Chen, Xin Li, Kai Chen, Bo Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, and Liang He. Building
self-evolving agents via experience-driven lifelong learning: A framework and benchmark. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.19005, 2025.
[5] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and
Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[6] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2023.
[7] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[8] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[9] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha
Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann,
Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[10] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
[11] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein.
Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, 2023.
[12] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. ExpeL: LLM agents are
experiential learners. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(17):19666–19674, 2024.
[13] Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. MemoryBank: Enhancing large language
models with long-term memory. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(17):19724–
19731, 2024.
[14] Guibin Zhang, Haotian Ren, Chong Zhan, Zhenhong Zhou, Junhao Wang, He Zhu, Wangchunshu Zhou, and
Shuicheng Yan. Memevolve: Meta-evolution of agent memory systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.18746, 2025.
[15] Yixuan Tang and Yi Yang. Multihop-rag: Benchmarking retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop queries.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15391, 2024.
[16] Akshay Verma, Swapnil Gupta, Siddharth Pillai, Prateek Sircar, and Deepak Gupta. Reflectiverag: Rethinking
adaptivity in retrieval-augmented generation. 2026.
[17] Haozhen Zhang, Quanyu Long, Jianzhu Bao, Tao Feng, Weizhi Zhang, Haodong Yue, and Wenya Wang. Memskill:
Learning and evolving memory skills for self-evolving agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02474, 2026.
[18] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.5401, 2014.
[19] Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. Memory networks. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2015.
[20] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Hybrid computing using a neural network with dynamic
external memory. Nature, 538(7626):471–476, 2016.
11

ICALK@ECNU

[21] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich
Kuttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktaschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented
generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
[22] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George
van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob
Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock,
Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen,
and Laurent Sifre. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2022.
[23] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez.
MemGPT: Towards LLMs as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.
[24] Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building productionready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413, 2025.
[25] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan,
and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
[26] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve,
generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[27] Soyeong Jeong, Jinheon Baek, Sukmin Cho, Sung Ju Hwang, and Jong C. Park. Adaptive-RAG: Learning to adapt
retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
[28] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Interleaving retrieval with
chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
[29] Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Xin Guo, Dingwen Yang,
Chenyang Liao, Wei He, et al. Agentgym: Evaluating and training large language model-based agents across
diverse environments. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 27914–27961, 2025.
[30] Yuxin Zuo, Kaiyan Zhang, Shang Qu, Li Sheng, Xuekai Zhu, Biqing Qi, Youbang Sun, Ganqu Cui, Ning Ding,
and Bowen Zhou. TTRL: Test-time reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16084, 2025.
[31] Zhiheng Xi, Jixuan Huang, Chenyang Liao, Baodai Huang, Honglin Guo, Jiaqi Liu, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye, Jiazheng
Zhang, Wenxiang Chen, et al. Agentgym-rl: Training llm agents for long-horizon decision making through
multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08755, 2025.
[32] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang,
Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.

12

ICALK@ECNU

A

Theoretical Analysis and Proofs

In this section, we provide a formal analysis of how the adaptive rollout and process reward mechanism in P ROACT RL
aids credit assignment. Rather than claiming strict variance reduction or strict isolation of causal factors, we show that
constructing a matched trajectory pair from a shared interaction prefix yields a localized, counterfactual-correlated
empirical signal at the branching step.
To formalize this, we define the expected environment-level marginal utility of a specific retrieval action R ETRIEVE(q)
at history htb relative to the expected outcome of continuing without retrieval under the current behavior policy:
m(htb , q) ≜ Eτ ∼π [Renv | htb , atb = R ETRIEVE(q)] − Eτ ∼π [Renv | htb , atb ∼ π(· | htb , Aenv )] .

(13)

The paired-branch mechanism does not provide an unbiased estimator of this quantity, but it aims to construct a
single-sample empirical proxy that is locally aligned with it. To interpret the pairwise comparison, we require the
following assumption regarding the underlying environment and the retrieval system.
Assumption 1 (Prefix Replayability and Consistency). For any branching step tb , the environment state and the agent’s
internal history htb can be exactly restored to explore alternative continuations. The transition dynamics P (s′ | s, a)
and observation model O(o | s′ , a) remain consistent across branched rollouts. Furthermore, the memory repository D
and the retrieval function outputs are deterministic and fixed during these rollouts. For the matched no-retrieval branch,
the branching action is sampled from π(· | htb , Aenv ), and the subsequent suffix is generated from the same behavior
policy under the replayed state.
Proposition 1 (Local Credit Assignment via Counterfactual Rollouts). Let htb be the shared interaction history up to
the branching step tb . Consider a matched rollout pair sampled under the P ROACT RL objective: τ ret (indexed by i)
(i)
with retrieval action atb = R ETRIEVE(qtb ), and its counterfactual τ no-ret (indexed by j) with an environment action
(j)
atb ∈ Aenv . Under Assumption 1, and under the local GRPO approximation in which ρ ≈ 1 while clipping and the KL
term are omitted, the branching-step contribution to the pairwise policy gradient admits the decomposition
(i)

(j)

gtb ≜ Ai ∇θ log πθ (atb | htb ) + Aj ∇θ log πθ (atb | htb )


Ai + A j
(i)
(j)
=
∇θ log πθ (atb | htb )πθ (atb | htb )
2
(i)
πθ (atb | htb )
Ai − A j
+
∇θ log
.
(j)
2
πθ (at | ht )
b

(14)

b

Hence the local update of the log-odds between the sampled retrieval action and the sampled environment action is
governed by the empirical advantage gap Ai − Aj . Moreover, for the matched no-retrieval branch, where rjproc = 0,
Ai − A j =

(Rienv − Rjenv ) + riproc + (rieff − rjeff )
std({Rktraj }G
k=1 ) + ϵ

,

(15)

and therefore
T −T

Ai − A j =

j
i
∆i − λT max(T
+ riproc + (rieff − rjeff )
j ,1)

std({Rktraj }G
k=1 ) + ϵ

.

(16)

Thus, the branch comparison provides a shaped, noisy empirical proxy that combines the sampled environment margin,
the explicit process reward, and the efficiency terms.

Proof. We analyze the unclipped surrogate gradient of the GRPO objective for a specific matched pair (i, j) sampled
from a group of G rollouts for a task instance x. Assuming the policy remains close to the old behavior policy (ρ ≈ 1)
and temporarily omitting the KL divergence penalty for algebraic clarity, the empirical gradient contribution of this pair
is:
∇θ Jpair (θ) ≈ Ai ∇θ log πθ (τ (i) | x) + Aj ∇θ log πθ (τ (j) | x).
13

(17)

ICALK@ECNU

Under Assumption 1, both trajectories strictly share the prefix τ<tb . Decomposing the joint log-probability of each
trajectory temporally yields three distinct update phases:
tX
b −1


∇θ Jpair (θ) ≈
∇θ log πθ (at | ht ) Ai + Aj
t=1

{z

|

}

Shared Prefix Update
(i)

(j)

+ Ai ∇θ log πθ (atb | htb ) + Aj ∇θ log πθ (atb | htb )
|
{z
}

(18)

Branching Step Update

+ Ai

X

(i)

(i)

X

∇θ log πθ (at | ht ) + Aj

t>tb

(j)

∇θ log πθ (at

(j)

| ht ) .

t>tb

{z

|

}

Suffix Update
(i)

(j)

Focus on the Branching Step Update. Writing πi ≜ πθ (atb | htb ) and πj ≜ πθ (atb | htb ), we have
gtb = Ai ∇θ log πi + Aj ∇θ log πj
 Ai − A j

Ai + A j
=
∇θ log πi + ∇θ log πj +
∇θ log πi − ∇θ log πj
2
2
Ai + A j
Ai − A j
πi
=
∇θ log(πi πj ) +
∇θ log .
2
2
πj

(19)

Therefore, the coefficient multiplying the local log-odds direction ∇θ log ππji is exactly (Ai − Aj )/2.
Next, because Ak is defined by group normalization, the sample mean cancels in the pairwise difference:
Ai − A j =

Ritraj − Rjtraj
std({Rktraj }G
k=1 ) + ϵ

.

(20)

For the matched no-retrieval branch, rjproc = 0, so substituting Rtraj = Renv + rproc + reff gives
Ai − A j =

(Rienv − Rjenv ) + riproc + (rieff − rjeff )
std({Rktraj }G
k=1 ) + ϵ

.

(21)

T −T

j
i
Substituting the rollout margin definition ∆i = (Rienv − Rjenv ) + λT max(T
, we obtain
j ,1)

T −T

Ai − A j =

j
i
+ riproc + (rieff − rjeff )
∆i − λT max(T
j ,1)

std({Rktraj }G
k=1 ) + ϵ

.

(22)

Under Assumption 1, Rjenv is a single-sample Monte Carlo proxy for the second expectation in m(htb , qtb ), while ∆i
further augments this shared-prefix comparison with the length regularizer. Therefore, the branching step anchors the
retrieval action against a concrete counterfactual continuation and yields a shaped, outcome-correlated empirical signal.
The result is local rather than global: it identifies the exact branch direction affected by the pairwise comparison, but it
does not imply that Ai − Aj is an unbiased estimator of m(htb , qtb ).
Discussion. Proposition 1 shows that the retrieval-versus-no-retrieval preference update at the branching step is
controlled by Ai − Aj . Under the reward definition of P ROACT RL, this coefficient is determined by the sampled
environment margin, the process reward, and the efficiency-difference term, all scaled by the group-normalization
factor.
• Learning when to retrieve. At the branching step, the pairwise gradient contains the term
Ai − A j
πθ (R ETRIEVE(qtb ) | htb )
.
∇θ log
(j)
2
πθ (at | ht )
b

b

Therefore, if the retrieval branch yields a larger shaped return than its matched no-retrieval continuation, then
Ai − Aj > 0 and the local update increases the relative log-probability of retrieving at history htb . If the
retrieval branch underperforms, then Ai − Aj < 0 and the update suppresses retrieval at that same decision
point. Because the two branches share the identical prefix, this signal is attached to the necessity of retrieval at
the current state rather than to unrelated earlier actions.
14

ICALK@ECNU

• Learning what to retrieve. The updated action is not a generic retrieval flag, but the instantiated action
R ETRIEVE(qtb ). Consequently, the same gradient step also reinforces or suppresses the specific query content
qtb . Queries that retrieve a useful experience Ete increase the downstream environment return, are more likely
to induce a positive rollout margin ∆i , and receive positive process-level reinforcement through riproc . In
contrast, vague or irrelevant queries tend to produce weak or negative margins and therefore lose relative
probability. This is why P ROACT RL learns the wording of the query jointly with the timing of retrieval.
Consequently, the shared-prefix paired-branch construction explains why P ROACT RL can learn both when to retrieve
and what to retrieve: the branch comparison supplies a local preference update for triggering retrieval, and that same
update is tied to the concrete query instance that produced the observed downstream outcome.

B

Algorithm Details

This section provides the complete algorithmic description of P ROACTAGENT, complementing the formal definitions in
Section 3. Algorithm 1 outlines the full online co-evolution loop that interleaves policy optimization with experience
accumulation. Algorithm 2 details the paired-branch reward computation that supplies step-level supervision for
retrieval decisions.
Algorithm 1 Experience-Enhanced Online Evolution
Require: Base policy πθ , empty experience base D, task stream X , group size G
Ensure: Evolved policy πθ , populated experience base D
1: Cold Start: Train πθ via SFT on successful trajectories
2: for each training iteration do
3:
Sample task batch {x1 , . . . , xB } from X
4:
for each task x in batch do
5:
for i = 1, . . . , G do
6:
Retrieve initial context D0 ← TopK(qinit , D, K)
7:
for t = 1, . . . , T do
8:
Sample action at ∼ πθ (· | ht , D<t )
9:
if at = R ETRIEVE(qt ) then
10:
Dt ← TopK(qt , D, K); append to context
11:
else
12:
Execute at in environment; observe ot+1 , rtenv
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
Record trajectory τ (i)
16:
end for
17:
Construct paired branches via Algorithm 2
G
18:
Compute {Ritraj }G
i=1 and group-normalized advantages {Ai }i=1
19:
end for
20:
Update πθ via GRPO objective JP ROACT RL (θ)
21:
Extract typed entries from completed trajectories; update D
22: end for

▷ Appendix D.1

▷ Eq. 11
▷ Appendix C.3

Interaction protocol. During each rollout, the agent processes the task prompt augmented with an initial retrieval
context D0 drawn from D. At each subsequent step, the policy produces either an environment action or a retrieval
action R ETRIEVE(qt ). When a retrieval action is triggered, the experience base returns a type-balanced set of entries
Dt (Equation 4 in Section 3.2), which is appended to the agent’s context before the next decision. The policy treats
retrieval as a regular action within the augmented action space A = Aenv ∪ Aret , requiring no separate gating module
or confidence threshold.
Experience update protocol. After each training iteration, completed trajectories are processed by the extraction
model (Appendix C.3) to produce typed entries. Factual and episodic memories are extracted from individual trajectories,
success and failure skills are distilled from outcome-specific subsets, and comparative skills are generated from paired
branches produced by Algorithm 2. All new entries are deduplicated against the existing repository before insertion.
Priority scores of retrieved entries associated with successful trajectories are incremented, progressively surfacing
high-utility experience.
15

ICALK@ECNU

Algorithm 2 P ROACT RL Paired-Branch Reward Computation
Require: Trajectory τ (i) with retrieval at steps {t1 , . . . , tn }, policy πθ , experience base D
Ensure: Trajectory-level reward Ritraj
1: Select branching step tb uniformly from {t2 , . . . , tn−1 }
▷ Interior steps only
2: Restore environment state at htb via prefix replay
▷ Assumption 1
(j)
3: Suppress retrieval at tb ; sample atb ∼ πθ (· | htb , Aenv )
(j)
4: Generate no-retrieval continuation τ (j) from (htb , atb ) under πθ
P
P
5: Evaluate: Rienv ← t rtenv (τ (i) ), Rjenv ← t rtenv (τ (j) )
Tj −Ti
6: Compute rollout margin: ∆i ← (Rienv − Rjenv ) + λT max(T
j ,1)
7: if ∆i > 0 then
▷ Retrieval improved outcome
8:
riproc ← +α
9: else if ∆i < 0 then
▷ Retrieval was redundant or harmful
10:
riproc ← −α
11: else
12:
riproc ← 0
13: end if


T̄g(i) −Ti
14: rieff ← −wq · 1[repeati ] + clip wt max(
, −|wt |, |wt |
T̄
,1)
g(i)

traj

15: return Ri

← Rienv + riproc + rieff

Table 5: The five entry families in the E XPERIENCE BASE. Memory entries (M) supply factual evidence, while skill
entries (S) supply behavioral guidance. This separation ensures that a single query can retrieve complementary support
from both groups.
Group

Entry Type

Content

Source

Memory (M)

Factual (Mf )
Episodic (Me )

Environment facts, tool outputs, persistent states
Local plans, constraints, trajectory-specific reminders

Per-trajectory
Per-trajectory

Skill (S)

Success (S + )
Failure (S − )
Comparative (S ∆ )

Reusable strategies from successful completions
Error patterns and corrective rules
Contrastive insights on why one continuation outperforms another

Successful trajectories
Failed trajectories
Paired A/B branches

C

Experience Base Implementation

This section details the implementation of the structured experience base introduced in Section 3.2, whose role in the
overall system is illustrated in Algorithm 1. We describe the repository schema, the retrieval backend, and the entry
extraction procedure.
C.1

Repository Schema

The E XPERIENCE BASE maintains five typed entry families, organized into two complementary groups. The memory
group (M) provides evidence by recording what is true or what has happened, while the skill group (S) provides
behavioral guidance by encoding what to do or what to avoid. Table 5 summarizes the schema.
Each entry r ∈ D stores four fields: (1) a natural-language when_to_use description that specifies the triggering
context, (2) a content field containing the actual knowledge or guidance, (3) an embedding vector e(r) computed from
the when_to_use field, and (4) a priority score p(r) that is updated based on retrieval utility. The when_to_use field
also serves as the exact-match deduplication key, preventing the repository from accumulating near-identical entries.
C.2

Retrieval Backend

The retrieval backend is built on the following components:
• Encoder. All when_to_use fields and runtime queries are embedded using all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence embeddings (384 dimensions).
• Vector index. Embeddings are L2-normalized and stored in a FAISS inner-product index, which is equivalent to
cosine similarity search over normalized vectors.
16

ICALK@ECNU

• Scoring. Given a query qt , each candidate entry r is scored as score(qt , r) = sim(e(qt ), e(r)) + λp p(r), combining
semantic similarity with the priority term (Section 3.2).
• Type-balanced retrieval. The retrieval budget K is divided equally across the five entry types, with one slot allocated
to each by default. This prevents any single type from dominating the returned context and encourages complementary
evidence.
• Priority update. Only entries that are actually retrieved during a trajectory receive priority updates. Specifically,
when a trajectory succeeds, the priority of each retrieved entry is incremented by one. Entries that are stored but never
retrieved receive no update. This mechanism progressively surfaces high-utility entries without requiring explicit
supervision.
• Deduplication. Exact-match deduplication on the when_to_use field is enabled by default. The current implementation does not impose a fixed repository capacity cap or employ a learned eviction policy.
C.3

Entry Extraction and Maintenance

After each episode, completed trajectories are filtered to retain episodes with valid response tokens and then grouped by
task instance. Within each group, a dedicated extraction model (Qwen3-32B) produces typed entries according to the
following procedure:
1. Factual and episodic memories are extracted from individual trajectories via summarization. The extractor
produces at most two entries of each type per trajectory, focusing on environment facts and trajectory-specific plans
or constraints.
2. Success and failure skills are distilled from outcome-specific trajectory subsets. Each distiller returns one to three
JSON-formatted entries that encode reusable strategies (from successes) or corrective rules (from failures).
3. Comparative skills are distilled from matched trajectory pairs. Paired A/B branches produced by P ROACT RL are
prioritized because they share the same task prefix and therefore expose the most localized contrastive signal. When
such pairs are unavailable, the extractor falls back to outcome-ranked trajectory pairs from the same task group.
The complete prompts used for each extraction type are provided in Appendix E.

D

Training Protocol

This section describes the full training pipeline, including the cold-start phase, the paired-branch rollout procedure,
and the retrieval annealing schedule. These stages correspond to the procedural flow outlined in Algorithm 1 and
Algorithm 2. The hyperparameters used in all experiments are summarized in Table 6.
D.1

Pipeline Overview

The training pipeline proceeds through six sequential stages:
1. Cold start. The base policy is trained via supervised learning on successful trajectories to learn the interaction
format, valid action syntax, and retrieval-tag conventions. This stage is critical for initializing the policy with
sufficient tool-calling competence before reinforcement learning begins (as confirmed by the ablation in Section 4.3).
2. Rollout sampling. Multiple rollouts are sampled for each training prompt under the current policy. A portion of
these rollouts is configured as no-retrieval trajectories through the retrieval_enabled switch, whose probability
is annealed across training phases.
3. Paired-branch construction. When paired branching is active, the system identifies retrieval-trigger steps in
retrieval-enabled rollouts, replays the corresponding prefixes, and creates matched no-retrieval branches (Section D.2).
4. Reward computation. The environment outcome is combined with the paired-branch process reward and the
efficiency bonus to produce the P ROACT RL trajectory-level reward (Section 3.3).
5. Policy update. The policy is updated using GRPO-style group normalization with PPO-style clipped surrogate
optimization.
6. Experience base update. The experience base D is updated by extracting factual, episodic, success, failure, and
comparative entries from the new trajectories (Appendix C.3).
17

ICALK@ECNU

This organization ensures that policy learning and memory growth remain tightly interleaved throughout training,
realizing the co-evolution loop described in Section 3.2.
D.2

Paired-Branch Rollout Procedure

When a rollout τ contains one or more retrieval actions, the system constructs a matched no-retrieval branch as follows.
The branching step tb is selected uniformly at random from the interior retrieval steps of τ , excluding the first and last
retrieval actions. Boundary retrievals are excluded because they are more susceptible to confounds from initialization
effects (at the first step) or termination effects (at the last step), which could introduce noise into the process reward
signal. The environment state at tb is restored via prefix replay (Assumption 1), and the no-retrieval branch τ no-ret is
generated by suppressing the retrieval action at tb and sampling subsequent actions from the current policy.
D.3

Retrieval Annealing

During training, the probability of disabling retrieval is annealed across three phases:
• Calibration phase. Corresponding branch paths were generated for all retrieval trajectories, ensuring abundant
no-retrieval trajectories for paired A/B branch construction. The learning rate warmup ratio is set to 0.2.
• Transition phase. The no-retrieval fraction decreases to 25%, maintaining some paired branches while allowing the
retrieval-enabled policy to receive more optimization signal. The warmup ratio is 0.3.
• Refinement phase. All rollouts are retrieval-enabled (0% disabled), concentrating optimization on the fully proactive
policy. The warmup ratio is 0.5.
The exact annealing ratios are reported in Table 6.
D.4

Hyperparameters

Table 6: Core hyperparameters of the P ROACTAGENT implementation. Annealing schedule entries are formatted as
(no-retrieval fraction, learning rate warmup ratio).
Component

Value

Base model
Extraction model
Retriever embedding model
Vector index
Retrieval size
Type quota
Paired-branch process reward (α)
Repeated-query penalty weight (wq )
Step-efficiency weight (wt )
Annealing schedule
No-retrieval branch

Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (main), Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (scaling study)
Qwen3-32B (memory and experience extraction)
all-MiniLM-L6-v2
FAISS inner-product index over normalized embeddings
k=5
1 each for factual / episodic / success / failure / comparative
0.5
0.5
0.25
calibration: (0.5, 0.2), transition: (0.25, 0.3), refinement: (0.0, 0.5)
start-memory disabled, Retrieval suppressed

E

Experience Extraction Prompts

This section presents the complete prompts used by the extraction model (Qwen3-32B) to distill completed trajectories
into typed experience entries for the E XPERIENCE BASE . Each prompt targets a specific entry family and is designed
to produce structured JSON outputs with two fields: when_to_use (the triggering context for future retrieval) and
content (the actual knowledge or guidance). All prompts enforce domain-agnostic language to ensure that extracted
entries generalize across task types rather than overfitting to specific benchmark instances.
E.1

Memory Extraction Prompt

The following prompt extracts factual and episodic memories from individual trajectories. Factual memories capture
verifiable environment facts, while episodic memories capture experiential insights and temporal constraints.

18

ICALK@ECNU

Memory Extraction Prompt
# Role
You are a Meta-Cognitive Memory Manager for an AI Agent. Your goal is to analyze the
agent’s recent execution trajectory to extract high-value, reusable memories.
# Input Data
## Execution Process
{execution_process}
## Result
{execution_result}
# Task
Review the provided [Execution Process] and [Result]. You must extract two distinct types
of memories to assist in future tasks.
**Constraint: You must extract at least ONE memory in total across the two categories.**
1. **Factual Memory (Objective Truths):**
* *Definition:* Verifiable facts learned during execution.
* *Examples:* Info/Preferences, Domain Knowledge, Tool/System Facts.
2. **Episodic Memory (Experience, Reflection & Temporal Events):**
* *Definition:* Insights derived from the flow of events, strategies, errors, OR **
specific real-world time constraints/schedules**.
* *Logic Examples:* "If I take step A, error B occurs," "Method X is faster than Y."
* *Temporal Examples:* "User has a class at 8 AM on Mondays," "The deadline is this
Friday."
# Constraints & Logic
1. **Selection:** Extract a MAXIMUM of **2 Factual** and **2 Episodic** memories.
2. **"when_to_use" Strategy:**
* For *Factual*: Focus on the **Context Trigger** (e.g., "When using ‘pandas‘...").
* For *Episodic (Logic)*: Focus on the **Situational Trigger** (e.g., "When the
dataset is empty...").
* For *Episodic (Time)*: Focus on the **Temporal Trigger** (e.g., "When it is Monday
morning," "At 8:00 AM").
3. **Minimum Output:** Do not output an empty result. You must find the most valuable
takeaway, even if minor.

# Output Format
Output a single valid JSON object strictly following this schema.
{{
"factual_memories": [
{{
"when_to_use": "<Precise context trigger>",
"memory": "<The objective fact>"
}}
],
"episodic_memories": [
{{
"when_to_use": "<Precise situational OR temporal trigger>",
"memory": "<The insight, strategy, or scheduled event>"
}}
]
}}

E.2

Success Skill Extraction Prompt

The following prompt distills reusable best practices from successful trajectories. It identifies the critical strategic
decisions that enabled task completion and formulates them as forward-looking, imperative rules.
19

ICALK@ECNU

Success Skill Extraction Prompt
You are an expert Meta-Cognitive Success Analyst reviewing a successful trajectory of an
LLM Agent.
Your goal is to analyze a "Success Trajectory" (a sequence of actions that successfully
achieved a goal) and extract high-utility **Best Practice Memories** that will
reinforce efficient strategies and ensure consistent success in similar future
scenarios.
You must look past routine actions and identify the **critical strategic decisions** or
**tool usage patterns** that streamlined the solution.
# INPUT DATA
## Original Query
{query}
## Step Sequence (Successful Trace)
{step_sequence}
## Context & Environment
{context}
## Outcome
This sequence ended in a {outcome} state.
# CRITICAL GUIDELINES FOR EXTRACTION
1. **FIELD: "when_to_use" (The Trigger Scope)**
- **Definition:** Precisely define the context where this best practice applies. You
MUST consider three dimensions:
a. **Task Requirement:** What is the user specifically asking for? (e.g., "When the
task requires verifying code execution results...")
b. **Specific Scenario:** What is the current state of the agent? (e.g., "When
possessing a vague error message but no source code...")
c. **Observation:** What favorable condition appeared? (e.g., "When the search
results return multiple high-confidence API documents...")
- **STRICT CONSTRAINT:**
- Do NOT use specific dataset names (e.g., "In AlfWorld").
- Do NOT use specific entity names (e.g., "When analyzing ’main.py’"). Instead,
generalize it (e.g., "When analyzing the entry-point script").
2. **FIELD: "experience" (The Solution)**
- **Definition:** A strict, actionable standard operating procedure.
- **Constraint:** **PURELY FORWARD-LOOKING.** Do NOT explain why the approach was
superior. Do NOT include phrases like "The agent succeeded because..." or "It is
better to...".
- **Structure:** Directly provide the step-by-step instruction on how to execute this
efficiency. Use imperative language (e.g., "Always verify X before doing Y", "Use
tool A in combination with parameter B").
- **Requirement:** Focus on **Non-Trivial** insights. Do not extract generic advice
like "Think carefully." Extract specific tool combinations or logic flows that
proved highly effective.
# OUTPUT FORMAT
Output strictly a JSON object containing 1-3 memory objects. No markdown text outside the
JSON.
‘‘‘json
{{
"skills": [
{{
"when_to_use": "When [Task Requirement / Specific Scenario / Observation] matches
...",

20

ICALK@ECNU

"experience": "[Actionable, step-by-step standard procedure to replicate success]."
}}
]
}}
‘‘‘

E.3

Failure Skill Extraction Prompt

The following prompt extracts corrective rules from failed trajectories. It focuses exclusively on the forward-looking
solution rather than the diagnosis of past mistakes, ensuring that extracted entries are immediately actionable.
Failure Skill Extraction Prompt
You are an expert Meta-Cognitive Forensic Analyst reviewing a failed trajectory of an LLM
Agent.
Your goal is to extract high-utility **Correction Memories** that will prevent this
specific failure from recurring.
You must look past surface-level errors to identify the solution, ensuring the memory **
only contains the correct path forward**, not a record of the mistake.
# INPUT DATA
## Original Query
{query}
## Step Sequence (Failed Trace)
{step_sequence}
## Context & Environment
{context}
## Outcome
This sequence ended in a {outcome} state.
# CRITICAL GUIDELINES FOR EXTRACTION
1. **FIELD: "when_to_use" (The Trigger Scope)**
- **Definition:** Precisely define the context where this memory applies. You MUST
consider three dimensions:
a. **Task Requirement:** What is the user specifically asking for? (e.g., "When the
task requires distinct counting of similar objects...")
b. **Specific Scenario:** What is the current state of the agent? (e.g., "When the
retrieved context is too long to fit in one prompt...")
c. **Observation:** What feedback did the environment provide? (e.g., "When the tool
execution returns a Timeout Error...")
- **STRICT CONSTRAINT:**
- Do NOT use specific dataset names (e.g., "In AlfWorld", "In HotpotQA").
- Do NOT use specific entity names (e.g., "When looking for file ’data.csv’"). Instead,
generalize it (e.g., "When looking for a target file that does not exist").
2. **FIELD: "experience" (The Solution)**
- **Definition:** A strict, actionable instruction on how to handle this exact situation
correctly.
- **Constraint:** **PURELY FORWARD-LOOKING.** Do NOT explain why the previous attempt
failed. Do NOT include diagnosis or "The agent failed because..." statements.
- **Content:** Directly provide the optimized logic or step-by-step procedure to succeed
immediately.
# OUTPUT FORMAT

21

ICALK@ECNU

Output strictly a JSON object containing 1-3 memory objects. No markdown text outside the
JSON.
‘‘‘json
{{
"skills": [
{{
"when_to_use": "When [Task Requirement / Specific Scenario / Observation] matches...",
"experience": "[Actionable, step-by-step strategy to succeed]."
}}
]
}}
‘‘‘

E.4

Comparative Skill Extraction Prompt

The following prompt distills contrastive insights from matched trajectory pairs. It compares a higher-quality trajectory
against a lower-quality one sharing the same task, identifies the divergence point, and formulates a reusable rule that
captures why the better continuation succeeded. Comparative entries produced from P ROACT RL paired branches carry
the strongest contrastive signal because the two trajectories share the same interaction prefix up to the branching step.
Comparative Skill Extraction Prompt

You are an expert Meta-Cognitive Analyst reviewing two trajectories for the exact same
task.
Your goal is to extract high-utility **Contrastive Memories** by comparing a higherquality trajectory against a lower-quality one and distilling a reusable, forwardlooking rule.
# INPUT DATA
## Original Query
{query}
## High Score Trajectory
{high_steps}
## Low Score Trajectory
{low_steps}

# ANALYSIS INSTRUCTIONS
## Step 1: Identify the "Divergence Point"
- Compare the two trajectories step-by-step.
- Acknowledge that the low-quality trajectory may have started correctly. Do not evaluate
valid initial steps as failures.
- Locate the earliest step where the higher-quality trajectory makes a better choice that
changes the outcome or improves progress.
## Step 2: Extract the Causal Mechanism
- Determine the concrete, actionable reason the high-quality choice works better (e.g.,
checks preconditions, uses the right tool parameter, avoids a loop).
- Avoid retrospective narration; focus on what should be done next time.
## Step 3: Formulate a Reusable Rule
- Convert the insight into an imperative rule the agent can follow in future similar
situations.

22

ICALK@ECNU

- Ensure the advice is **actionable**. It should tell the agent *what to do* in future
similar states, not just describe what happened in the past.
# CONSTRAINTS FOR OUTPUT FIELDS
## 1) ‘when_to_use‘
- **DO:** Describe the abstract scenario, the nature of the observation, or the specific
type of logical constraint (e.g., "When the user asks for a file modification but
the file path is ambiguous...").
- **DO NOT:** Mention specific dataset names, benchmark titles, or proper nouns of the
evaluation framework (e.g., NEVER use "AlfWorld", "HotPotQA", "Mind2Web", etc.).
## 2) ‘experience‘
- This string must be dense and instructional.
- This string must be a **Direct Actionable Command** only.
- **NEGATIVE CONSTRAINT:**
- DO NOT explain "Agent A succeeded because..."
- DO NOT mention "The failed agent did X..."
- DO NOT include retrospective analysis or justification.
- **TONE:** Imperative, authoritative, and concise.
- **Format:** A concrete rule for future tasks like "Always [Action] to [ensure Result/
avoid Error]." or "If [Condition], then [Action]."
# OUTPUT FORMAT
Output strictly a JSON object containing 1-3 memory objects. No markdown text outside the
JSON.
‘‘‘json
{{
"skills": [
{{
"when_to_use": "Abstract description of the triggering state...",
"experience": "Imperative rule or actionable advice for the next action. (e.g., ’
Always verify the file path with ls before attempting to read.’)"
}}
]
}}
‘‘‘

23

